docs: add benchmarking latency info (#3499)
neondatabase/website: content/docs/guides/benchmarking-latency.md

---
title: Benchmarking latency in Neon's serverless Postgres
subtitle: Techniques for obtaining meaningful latency data in serverless database environments
enableTableOfContents: true
updatedOn: '2025-05-21T00:00:00.000Z'
---

Benchmarking latency in Neon's serverless Postgres environment presents unique challenges due to compute auto-suspension, connection protocol differences, and geographic distribution. This guide provides detailed methodologies for separating cold-start costs from operational latency, selecting optimal connection types, and designing tests that accurately reflect production conditions.

## Understanding cold vs. hot queries

When benchmarking Neon databases, you'll encounter two distinct types of queries:

- **Cold queries**: Occur when a previously suspended compute resource is activated to process a request. By default, free-tier Neon databases suspend after 5 minutes of inactivity. A cold query typically adds several hundred milliseconds of latency.

> - **Hot queries**: Execute on already-active database instances, providing a more consistent performance baseline with normal low latency.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Hot queries**: Execute on an already-active database instance, delivering consistent low latency. These are typical in production environments where the database runs 24/7 or remains active most of the time.
```

This methodology isolates the cold start overhead from normal operating performance, giving you a clearer picture of both typical performance versus worst-case latency.

## Testing environment considerations

Before running benchmarks, determine exactly what kind of latency you want to measure:

- **Server-to-database latency**: If you're testing how quickly your application server can communicate with Neon, make your requests from the same location as your server. This is typically the most relevant metric for API performance.

- **Client-to-database latency**: If you're testing direct client connections (rare in production), benchmark from client locations.

Once you've determined what you're measuring:

- **Match your test environment to production**: Run your tests from the same region (or as close as possible) to your production environment. If your Neon database is in `us-east-1`, execute your benchmarks from a server in the same AWS region.

- **Avoid localhost testing**: Testing from your local workstation doesn't reflect real-world conditions where the database is typically queried from your deployed server, not the client.

> - **Geographic proximity**: Client-database proximity is the primary factor in connection latency. Testing from the same region will yield the most accurate results.

Reviewer: Is this the same point as the first one about running tests in the same region?

Author: Good point, this will be addressed 👍

## Connection types and their impact

Neon supports two connection protocols with distinctly different performance profiles. Understanding these differences is crucial for accurate benchmarking. For a comprehensive comparison, see [Choosing Connection Types](/docs/connect/choose-connection):

### HTTP connections

- **Performance profile**: Optimized for single-shot queries with minimal connection overhead
- **Use cases**: Ideal for serverless functions that execute a single query per invocation
- **Limitations**: Doesn't support sessions, interactive transactions, NOTIFY, or COPY protocol
- **When to benchmark**: Use for measuring performance of stateless, individual query operations
- **Optimization technique**: Connection caching can further reduce latency for HTTP connections

### WebSocket connections

- **Performance profile**: Higher initial connection overhead but significantly faster for subsequent queries
- **Use cases**: Optimal for applications that execute multiple queries over a maintained connection

> - **Features**: Supports full PostgreSQL functionality including sessions, transactions, and all Postgres protocols

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Features**: Supports full Postgres functionality including sessions, transactions, and all Postgres protocols
```

- **Initialization**: Requires multiple round-trips between client and server to establish

For implementation details on both connection methods, refer to the [Serverless Driver Documentation](/docs/serverless/serverless-driver).

**Benchmarking considerations**: When comparing HTTP vs WebSocket connections, you'll typically observe a bi-modal distribution in query latencies. HTTP connections generally show more consistent performance for individual queries, while WebSocket connections show higher initial latency followed by very low latency for subsequent operations. The runtime environment (Edge vs traditional Serverless) can also impact connection performance characteristics.

**Testing approach**: For WebSockets, establish the connection first, then measure query execution time separately. This reflects real-world usage where connections are reused rather than created for each query. For HTTP, measure individual query execution time including any per-query connection overhead.

## Real-world usage pattern simulation

To get meaningful results, design your benchmarks to simulate how your application actually interacts with Neon:

> - **Use persistent connections**: For web servers or long-running applications, initialize the database connection before measuring query timings, then run a series of queries on this persistent connection. Consider [Connection Pooling](/docs/connect/connection-pooling) for optimal performance.

Reviewer: Maybe make connection pooling its own list item.

Author: Thank you, connection pooling info will be expanded.

---
title: Benchmarking latency in Neon's serverless Postgres
subtitle: Techniques for obtaining meaningful latency data in serverless database environments
enableTableOfContents: true
updatedOn: '2025-05-21T00:00:00.000Z'
---

> Benchmarking latency in Neon's serverless Postgres environment presents unique challenges due to compute auto-suspension, connection protocol differences, and geographic distribution. This guide provides detailed methodologies for separating cold-start costs from operational latency, selecting optimal connection types, and designing tests that accurately reflect production conditions.

Reviewer 2: Maybe we could add something like "benchmarking is always hard to get right. Benchmarking query latencies is also a very complicated topic. And Neon's serverless platforms adds additional caveats on top" - basically highlighting that it's not just because of Neon that this is challenging.

- **Server-to-database latency**: If you're testing how quickly your application server can communicate with Neon, run benchmarks from the same location as your server. This is typically the most relevant metric for API performance.

- **Client-to-database latency**: If you're testing direct client connections (rare in production), benchmark from client locations.

Once you've determined what you're measuring:

- **Test from your production region**: Geographic proximity is the primary factor in connection latency. Run benchmarks from the same region as your production environment to get accurate results. If your Neon database is in `us-east-1`, execute benchmarks from a server in that AWS region.

- **Avoid localhost testing**: Testing from your local workstation doesn't reflect real-world conditions. In production, databases are typically queried from deployed servers, not client machines.

Avoid testing across unrealistic distances that don't represent your production setup, as this introduces network overhead your users won't experience. For more on geographic factors affecting latency, see [Connection Latency and Timeouts](/docs/connect/connection-latency).

> ## Connection types and their impact

Reviewer 2: Maybe highlight that these connection types are for serverless environments where long-running traditional TCP Postgres connections aren't available or would add too much of an overhead as they would need be established for every incoming request.

Author: Done!

Neon supports two connection protocols with distinctly different performance profiles. Understanding these differences is crucial for accurate benchmarking. For a comprehensive comparison, see [Choosing Connection Types](/docs/connect/choose-connection).

### HTTP connections

- **Performance profile**: Optimized for single-shot queries with minimal connection overhead

> - **Use cases**: Ideal for serverless functions that execute a single query per invocation

Reviewer 2: Not sure if we should say `a single query` here. WS seems to be ~3-5x slower than HTTP based on our new benchmark dashboard. If you execute 10 queries in parallel, then I think HTTP is superior. If you need 2-3 subsequent queries, then maybe WS makes sense but if the queries aren't blocking, then HTTP would be better, right?

Author: Makes sense, this area was updated accordingly. Thanks!

- **Client-to-database latency**: If you're testing direct client connections (rare in production), benchmark from client locations.

Once you've determined what you're measuring:

- **Test from your production region**: Geographic proximity is the primary factor in connection latency. Run benchmarks from the same region as your production environment to get accurate results. If your Neon database is in `us-east-1`, execute benchmarks from a server in that AWS region.

- **Avoid localhost testing**: Testing from your local workstation doesn't reflect real-world conditions. In production, databases are typically queried from deployed servers, not client machines.

Avoid testing across unrealistic distances that don't represent your production setup, as this introduces network overhead your users won't experience. For more on geographic factors affecting latency, see [Connection Latency and Timeouts](/docs/connect/connection-latency).

## Connection types and their impact

> Neon supports two connection protocols: HTTP and WebSocket, each with distinctly different performance profiles. While some modern edge platforms now support direct TCP connections, many serverless environments still have limitations around persistent connections or TCP support. Neon's HTTP and WebSocket methods work across all serverless platforms, with each protocol having different latency characteristics and feature trade-offs depending on your query patterns. Understanding these differences is crucial for accurate benchmarking. For a comprehensive comparison, see [Choosing Connection Types](/docs/connect/choose-connection).

Reviewer 2: Maybe add a link to the serverless driver docs as well.
